# Exercise 1 - argc and argv, I/O synchronization
The aim of this exercise is to implement a slightly more advanced version of the standard MPI "Hello World" example. Namely it will have two features:
* The I/O is handled only by the processor with rank zero. Namely, only processor zero will use `std::cout`, the other processors will need to send the message they want to output to processor zero.
* The "Hello world" greeting is personalized by looking at the arguments passed to the executable at run-time. Namely, if at least one extra argument is provided, it will be who we greet (e.g. "Hello Matteo"). If, on the other hand, no argument is provided, the standard "Hello world" is printed.

Compile your executable with the following flags:
```
mpicxx main.cpp -Wall -Wextra -pedantic -std=c++20 -O0
```
Test it with no extra arguments
```
$ mpirun -n 2 ./a.out
Hello, world, from rank 0 of 2.
Hello, world, from rank 1 of 2.
```
and with one extra argument
```
$ mpirun -n 2 ./a.out Matteo
Hello, Matteo, from rank 0 of 2.
Hello, Matteo, from rank 1 of 2.
```
Notice that in this way we are guaranteed that the greeting will be printed without superimposition between processors and with increasing rank values.

# Exercise 2 - $N$-dimensional gradient computation
Given the $N$-dimensional scalar field $f$
$$f: \mathbb R^N \rightarrow \mathbb R,$$
we want to compute its gradient at a given point $\mathbf y \in \mathbb R^N$
$$\nabla f(\mathbf x) |_{\mathbf y } = [\partial_{x_1}f(\mathbf x)|_{y_1}, ..., \partial_{x_N}f(\mathbf x)|_{y_N}].$$
To this end, we employ centered finite differences to approximate each component of the gradient. Namely:
$$\partial_{x_i}f(\mathbf x)|_{y_i} \approx \frac{f(\mathbf y^+_i) - f(\mathbf y^-_i)}{2h},$$
where $\mathbf y^+_i, \mathbf y^-_i \in \mathbb R^N$ are vectors equal to $\mathbf y$ apart from the $i$-th component, namely
$$\mathbf y^+_i = [y_0, ..., y_{i-1}, y_i + h , y_{i+1}, ..., y_N], \quad \mathbf y^-_i = [y_0, ..., y_{i-1}, y_i - h , y_{i+1}, ..., y_N].$$

Implement a function (that should work irrespective of $N$)
```cpp
template<size_t N>
std::array<double, N> compute_gradient(
  const std::function<double (const std::array<double, N> &)> &f,
  const std::array<double, N> &y, 
  double h)
```
that given as inputs:
* the scalar field $f$, `const std::function<double (const std::array<double, N> &)> &f`
* the point $\mathbf y$, `const std::array<double, N> &y`
* the finite difference pace $h$, `double h`

returns the gradient $\nabla f(\mathbf x) |_{\mathbf y }$ as `std::array<double, N>`, where each component is computed in parallel by a different processor and is then collected by processor zero by means of `MPI_Send` and `MPI_Recv`. We assume that $\mathbf y, h$ and $N$ are already known by all processors.

# Exercise 3 - Monte Carlo integration

### Monte Carlo integration method
The problem Monte Carlo integration addresses is the computation of a definite integral
$$I = \int_\Omega f(x) dx$$
where $\Omega \subset \mathbb R^n$ has measure $|\Omega|$
$$|\Omega| = \int_\Omega dx.$$
The naive Monte Carlo approach is to sample $N$ points uniformly in $\Omega$ 
$$x_1, ..., x_N \in \Omega,$$
and approximate $I$ as
$$I \approx Q_N = |\Omega| \frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^N f(x_i) = |\Omega| \bar f,$$
where $\bar f$ is the average of the $f(x_i)$. Indeed, by the law of large numbers:
$$\lim_{N\rightarrow+\infty} Q_N = I = \int_\Omega f(x) dx.$$
It can be shown that the estimation of the error of $Q_N$ is
$$\delta Q_N \approx \frac{|\Omega|}{\sqrt N} \sigma_N,$$
where
$$\sigma_N^2 = \frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{i=0}^N\left[f(x_i) - \left(\frac{1}{N}\sum_{i=1}^N f(x_i)\right)\right]^2 = \frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{i=0}^N(f(x_i) - \bar f)^2.$$

This result does not depend on the number of dimensions of the integral, which is the advantage of Monte Carlo integration against most deterministic methods that depend exponentially on the dimension.

### Random number generation
The `<random>` header provides implementations of pseudo-random number generators and statistical distributions. See the following example and recall that **every process should seed
differently its random engine**.
Initialization:
```cpp
#include <random>
#include <iostream>
 
int main() {
    std::random_device rd;  // Will be used to obtain a seed for the random number engine
    std::mt19937 gen(rd()); // Standard mersenne_twister_engine seeded with rd()
    std::uniform_real_distribution<> dis(1.0, 2.0);
    for (int n = 0; n < 10; ++n) {
        // Use dis to transform the random unsigned int generated by gen into a 
        // double in [1, 2). Each call to dis(gen) generates a new random double
        std::cout << dis(gen) << ' ';
    }
    std::cout << '\n';
}
```
### Assignment

Implement with MPI a parallel function to approximate definite integrals of $f: \mathbb R \rightarrow \mathbb R$ on the interval $[-1, 1] \subset \mathbb R$ with the Monte Carlo method with $N$ samples. The required prototype is as follows:
```cpp
std::pair<double, double>
montecarlo (const std::function<double (double)> & f, unsigned long N);
```
Where the return value is the pair $(Q_N, \delta Q_N^2)$, the estimated integral and its variance.
Moreover:
* Assume N is known only on rank zero. 
* In order to save memory, recall that for any scalar finite succession $\{t_i\}_{i=1}^n$
$${\frac {1}{n}}\sum _{i=1}^{n}\left(t_{i}-{\overline {t}}\right)^{2}={\frac {\sum _{i=1}^{n}t_{i}^{2}}{n}}-{\frac {\left(\sum _{i=1}^{n}t_{i}\right)^{2}}{n^{2}}}$$